[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> Those that have experienced
psychedelic plant medicines
describe profound journeys.
They have discovered deeper
consciousness and a deeper
understanding of our reality.
But can science explain
what's happening?
While researching the
effects of psilocybin,
a team led by Dr.
Robin Carhart-Harris
observed the default
mode network essentially
go offline when the
compound was applied,
allowing the subjects to
step into different realities
through their mind.
According to an article
published by the Imperial
College of London,
results of their studies
have been so promising,
the institution
launched the world's
first formal Center
for Psychedelic
Research in 2019.
>> They did a lot of
research exploring the effect
of psychedelics on the default
mode network and suggested that
maybe this is a neural
correlate of the ego,
that this is maybe
what the ego is,
just like accumulated
experiences forming
our personality, structure,
understanding of, who am I?
Who am I in relationship
to everybody else?
Who am I in
relationship to my past?
Who am I in relationship
to my future?
>> Despite advancements
in technology,
the mysteries and abilities
of the human brain continue
to confound and inspire us.
It is believed that
the default mode
network is where our
sense of self and memories
are created, where we
construct mental models
or simulated realities.
But those simulations seem
to lock the subjects deeper
into the consensus
reality rather than
create otherworldly realities.
Could our default
mode network actually
be part of an ancient
psychic technology,
a matrix capable of
locking our minds deeper
into material reality,
blocking access
to our spirituality
and alternate planes
of consciousness?
While decades of research led
to our current understanding
of the default mode
network, the term
itself was coined by
Washington University
of Medicine neurologist
Marcus Raichle in 2001.
>> The default mode network--
it's a network in
the brain that is
involved in our autobiographical
story of ourselves.
That's when we're thinking
about ourselves, when
we're thinking about
somebody else, when
we're wandering in our
minds into the past
or into the future.
>> The network is comprised of
different areas of the brain,
including the posterior
cingulate cortex, precuneus,
medial prefrontal, and
inferior parietal cortices.
It's less active when the
person is engaged in more
goal-oriented activities.
>> The Robin
Carhart-Harris group--
they brought forth a lot
of interesting ideas about,
what is this default
mode network?
So they were
studying the entropy
of the brain, how chaotic is the
brain's activity at any given
time, with the idea that it's
the entropy of the universe,
that they're ultimately--
like, things are just
in such a chaos and that,
when people are asleep,
or in a coma, or anesthetized,
they saw decreased
entropy of the brain activity.
And then, when they're awake,
they see increased entropy.
And then, when they get
into their dream state--
more entropy.
And then they go
into further states,
which could be really
enlightened states,
most people might
describe, or even madness,
going into full-blown
schizophrenic, psychosis,
or mania, where people are
just overwhelmed by the chaos
that they're exposed to.
So then they talked about
how the default mode
network and its activity
was altering that entropy,
that it was somehow suppressing
the entropy of consciousness
down to a level
that, for the human,
would be more manageable.
>> Their research also shows us
that, under normal conditions,
when people are simply resting
and not focusing on a task,
the DMN is not only active
but consuming roughly 80%
of the brain's energy.
Why does a resting
state of consciousness
consume so much of our energy?
>> When the default mode
network is too active, which,
for many of us, it is,
then rather than being
in a daydreaming
place sometimes,
we go to a ruminating place
or a high-anxiety place.
It can lead to disorders
like OCD, eating disorders,
severe anxiety,
intractable depression,
a lot of the conditions that
we are dealing with in society
right now.
>> Recent studies also show
that the default mode network
activation is correlated with
drug craving and withdrawal.
>> So the default mode
network is a functional part
of the human brain
and physiology.
It's important for
how we function.
But sometimes, when
it's stuck in a rut,
let's say, by
destabilizing it, we
allow for ourselves to come
into a higher functioning
version of the default
mode network in the sense
that, let's say, improvements
in mental health,
as they're measured,
could be observed.
So we're not just trying
to go up, up and away.
That's not useful either.
The ungrounded
optimism, the naivete--
that puts people in danger.
That's reckless
sometimes, so it needs
to be grounded in some way.
>> What is it that is keeping
human consciousness locked
so firmly in this
mental model of reality,
this default mode network?
>> So it's a
protective mechanism,
trying to predict scenarios
based on our experience.
And so that's useful.
However, if it's overly active,
and we suppress consciousness
further and further, like
they say, then we become,
you could say,
more narrow-minded.
Narrow-mindedness
leads to pessimism
just like open-mindedness
leads to optimism.
>> What psychedelics can do is
they temporarily disable that
default mode network.
They let you step out
of your reference frame
temporarily and look at
your existential situation
kind of at arm's length, kind
of, you're not caught up in it.
You can look at
it from a distance
a little more objectively.
>> Psychedelics suppress
the default mode network
for a period of time.
And that allows us to let go
of all of those protections
that we've placed around these
compartmentalized traumas
and memories and face
them in an honest way,
maybe for the first
time for some people.
>> We're trying to understand
how these substances can help
alter default mode
network functioning,
just like phsycotherapy
can and other things can.
>> What if reality is
not what we think it is?
What if one's daily
mental state was
built to keep us distracted
while energy is harvested?
And how can psychedelics help us
escape this default labyrinth?
As we strive to better
understand how our brain works
and how psychedelics can affect
the default mode network,
can we look to the wisdom of
our ancestors for more clues?
Is it possible that they already
understood what the default
mode matrix was capable of?
Archons in the Gnostic Gospels--
these demonic entities
suppressed human's ability
to transcend out of
the material realm.
Some believe that they
built a matrix construct
into the minds of the
human race in order
to harvest their psychic
energy, like parasites.
Could this be related to
the default mode network?
>> As a biologist, I kind of
see the reference of the Gnostic
Gospels to the Archons as kind
of like a virus on this planet
or in the cosmos.
And the way that viruses work
is they inject their programming
or DNA into the
host, which could
be a human or an organism.
And by a sneaky mechanism,
they get the host
to replicate more of the virus.
This might have been
occurring all down
the line of our evolution,
and these beings probably
would understand
genetics and engineering.
And they could implant something
like the default mode network
to keep us from being
aware of our divine origins
and keeping us more focused on
the physical level of reality
because that seems to be the
purpose of the default mode
network.
>> When I first learned about
the idea of a parasitic force
affecting human beings, that
seemed to me, like, woo.
And I'm skeptical in
nature, but not doubtful.
But when I started
connecting the dots,
then I started realizing
that what the Gnostics called
the Archons, and what the Native
Americans called [NON-ENGLISH],,
or Native Hawaiians
called [NON-ENGLISH],,
what Gurdjieff called the
"evil magician," and in Sufism,
it's called Shaitan,
same in kabbalah,
what Sri Aurobindo called
"occult hostile forces,"
what Carlos Castaneda called
the "flyers," the "predators."
So you see, there are many
different names for it.
There seem to be some invisible
force that is acting on us
and causing us to go through
this misguided perception,
where we use our faculties
to create negativity.
Hinduism tell us
that this is Maya,
a state of infatuation
with the material world,
where we lose the self.
We lose the self in the dream,
and we become the dream.
>> And so why
would they do this?
Some say, well, they feed
off of our suffering.
Or some say, they are just aside
from the spiritual evolutionary
ladder, and they just want
to feel powerful and have
beings to control.
>> Today, mankind struggles
with a daily onslaught of media
influence, social unrest, and
day-to-day stressors that can
contribute to a feeling of being
locked in that default mode
feedback loop.
>> There's less of that free
time for people to explore
their lives.
And their lives are
becoming dominated, not
leaving space for doing the
things that people do more,
I would say, all over the world.
In a village, they
have a local cuisine.
They know about the plants.
They play a lot.
They have a lot of festivals.
They have a lot of music.
They have a local
dance, what the humans
do all over the world.
But when you beat
it out of them,
they stop doing that stuff.
Then the culture just becomes
what they tell you on TV,
on the screen, on the phone.
We're going, oh, well,
everyone's watching this.
Let's all I watch that.
What about what you want to do?
What about what you would do
if you had more free time?
>> Yes.
Well, it's certainly true that
preliterate and Aboriginal
peoples have had an
obsession with time.
However, it's an
obsession shared
by the historical
societies as well.
Time seems to be the
dimension about which we
have the greatest anxiety,
perhaps because it's
the dimension into which we
see with the least clarity.
The point we're
trying to make here
that I have been involved
with over the past few years
is that a revisioning
of time would assuage
much of what is
called modern anxiety
and that we have limited
the categories we
were willing to entertain in
dealing with this problem.
>> Are there ways to
regulate the default mode?
Researchers have observed
meditation and exercise
having an effect on the
default mode network.
Additionally, plant
medicines, once again,
offer a possible breakthrough.
>> Robin Carhart-Harris and the
people in the Imperial College
of London-- they did a lot of
research exploring the effect
of psychedelics on the default
mode network and suggested that
maybe this is a neural
correlate of the ego.
And it was psilocybin
in this case
that really altered the
functioning of the default mode
network.
Somehow, decreasing certain
parts of the activity,
the default mode network
decreased possibly this ego,
this self-thinking
part of ourselves.
>> The default mode network
modulates something called
predictive coding.
And what predictive
coding is, is
when we come to
any new situation,
we're actually not
integrating all the details
and building the whole situation
for ourselves every time.
We take a few
details, and then we
fill in the rest based on
things that have happened to us
before.
When we shut down
the default mode
network for a period of time,
we shut down predictive coding.
And what that allows us to do
is to release these old stories
that we keep imposing
again, and again,
and again on each
new situation that we
encounter so that we can build
new stories for ourselves.
>> And that's
basically how we dream.
We become the dream,
and consensual reality
is no longer accessible.
We only realize that it's
a dream when we wake up.
So this reality seems to
be working in the same way.
But it's very important to
realize that to wake the self
up in a dream requires
judicious handling, awareness,
steadfastness, resilience,
going toward the fear
that we created
in the first place
to not apply the
unhealthy attachment,
to learn how to snap out
of the unhealthy baseline.
>> If humans are locked in this
limited perception of reality,
unable to wake from the dream,
does it make them easier
to manipulate and control?
Perhaps this is why
psychedelics have
been demonized and
prohibited by the government,
while other harmful and
addictive substances are
sanctioned.
Recent research also
shows increased activity
in the default mode network is
linked with mental disorders
like depression, anxiety,
and schizophrenia.
>> In some extreme cases, it
can lead to severe anxiety,
eating disorders, OCD, and many
of the mental disorders that we
see going on in
society right now.
>> In modern times, the Greek
myth of Pandora's box has been
boiled down to an idiom, warning
against starting new things
that may have
unforeseen consequences.
In the original story,
Epimetheus was gifted a wife
from Zeus, named Pandora.
Along with her comes a sealed
vase and explicit instructions
not to open it.
Curiosity gets the
best of Pandora,
and she opens it, releasing
all of the evil that
now plagues the world.
One item remains in
that container, Elpis.
This roughly translates
to hope or expectation.
Reserving expectation
is a shamanic discipline
to avoid distraction in a
world of illusion, our material
reality.
One can easily draw parallels
from this story to Eve
eating the forbidden
fruit, leading to her
and Adam being exiled
from the Garden of Eden.
Is it possible that these
are both shamanic stories
or forbidden
psychedelic awakenings?
>> In Bwiti, which is the
tradition from equatorial
Africa, we talk about
this idea of mabondo.
So you go into a ceremony
praying for mabondo.
And mabondo means
grace or benediction.
We approach the medicine with
humility because it's a chance.
It's an opportunity.
It's a time for great luck.
And so the less we have
our own ideas projected
onto that experience, the more
the medicine can do for us.
When we have too many
preconceived notions,
it can also be disrespectful
to the medicine
because this medicine is
here with its own gifts,
with its own teachings.
It is a master, and it has a
transmission unique for you.
>> Long ago, shamans
and priesthoods,
well aware of the powers that
psychedelic plants possessed,
closely guarded access to them.
Today, interest in and access
to psychedelics is on the rise.
This has led to
an increased focus
on creating safe and
effective settings, optimized
to individual's needs.
>> Everybody's different.
I think that some people can go
through these transformative,
challenging
experiences, and they
don't find them like an ordeal.
They can experience them as
though it was a revelation
almost to salvation.
They can experience a dramatic
reduction in anxiety and fear,
and it's not a
challenging experience.
For other people,
it is an ordeal.
And I think a lot of it has
to do with the inability
to surrender.
That's one of the keys
to psychedelic therapy.
Once you have the set
optimized and the setting,
and the medicine, and the
dose, the responsibility,
if you will, or the
job of the patient
is to trust the process.
>> I certainly know people who
have gone into the psychedelic
experience with the intention
of getting some answers.
So it's totally possible
that you can lift the veils,
open the doors of perception,
and get an idea of what really
would be good for
you, especially if you
set your intentions on that.
>> Many of the thousands
of journey reports shared
and cataloged online over the
past two decades report that
DMT pushed participants'
consciousness outside of normal
reality.
The other side is described
as a structured dimension
and that it felt more
real than what we commonly
accept as reality.
Former UFC champion Rashad
Evan's own personal journey
lines up with these accounts.
>> So when I came
back to my body,
I remember the
feeling of just loss.
It felt as if I just
lost the love of my life,
and I remember just crying.
I remember just saying like,
please don't go, please
don't go, please don't go.
And then I slowly
started to open my eyes,
and I just feel my face.
And I have tears running down
my face, and my heart's racing.
And I'm still mumbling the
words, please don't go, please
don't go.
And I really don't understand
why I'm saying that,
but I feel it.
And as I open my
eyes, I just start
to see reality just
very pixelated.
And as I open my eyes longer, it
starts to come into focus more.
And it just slowly starts
just to piece together,
like a video game.
It let me know that reality
was far more vast than I
could have ever imagined.
I just stayed in awe
for the longest time,
and then I couldn't
stop thinking about it.
And whenever I
had a free moment,
I would just think about
that, just the magnificence
of this consciousness
and just the magnificence
of what was inside of me.
And I had no idea.
It was really hard to
understand, for the most part.
But as I continue on my journey,
more understanding about it
starts to reveal itself.
>> In the ancient myths
of lost civilizations,
Atlantis and Lemuria, humanity
was divided primarily amongst
the technologically advanced
and spiritually advanced.
With technologies growing
influence on our lives,
more people are
seeking to reconnect
with their spirituality.
Could this pattern
be emerging again?
Today, mankind has come to rely
on internet technology for just
about everything.
It's how we learn, entertain
ourselves, and communicate.
But all of this convenience
and interconnectedness
may come at a cost.
These networks rely on
radio frequency signals
to relay information, creating
their own electromagnetic
fields.
Some believe that
these EMFs not only
pose a risk as a carcinogen,
but that they can also interfere
with pineal gland activity.
Again, this is the part
of the brain associated
with self realization,
enlightenment,
and higher and expanded states.
>> EMFs or Electromagnetic
Frequencies--
they have a kind of
sameness of the pattern
that they broadcast,
and this lacks
the signature of living forms.
We have also found
that they happen
to be broadcast in the same
frequency range as our biology.
So they actually interact
with our biology.
And they cause a lot
of negative effects,
including affecting
the pineal gland.
And we know that
the pineal gland
is extremely important for
higher states of awareness,
for how good we sleep, our
mood, all of these things.
So the electromagnetic
frequencies are not necessarily
helping humanity.
>> If true, could these
EMF-producing technologies lock
people's brains into the
default mode network?
With a new
technological obstacle,
what are the ramifications
for the future of psychedelics
and consciousness exploration?
The use of these
medicinal plants
can help turn off the
default mode network,
but this kind of
awakening is not a simple
"one size fits all" solution.
Integrating these experiences
into our everyday lives
remains a challenge.
>> We know that these sacred
plant medicines have an effect
on the default mode
network in the brain,
and they seem to render it
quiet for some period of time.
And when this kind of monotonous
drone of self-limiting programs
is silenced, we
have these glimpses
of the higher worlds of expanded
states of awareness of, really,
a more real reality than
we normally exist in
in our baseline consciousness.
And then, when we're not in
the influence of the medicine,
we come back to what
we call normal reality.
And the challenge is
always to integrate
the gifts of what we have
seen into our everyday life.
And it does seem that
they do get integrated,
but it takes a
little bit of work
because the reality seems so
different and so far apart.
But actually, they're just
layers of the one reality.
And so that is the gift
of the plant medicines,
is to bring back these
gifts and these glimpses
into the higher worlds
and to actually live them.
>> Whenever we are
catapulted out of normal,
we're being sent
into the unknown.
We're being sent into mystery.
That is incredibly
fertile ground
for completely new and
unexpected possibilities
for healing to happen,
if we're willing to take
advantage of that.
>> If the Archons of the Gnostic
Gospels are truly harvesting
human energy, using the default
mode network to keep us blaming
the simulation, could this
unique class of the plant
kingdom be here to serve as
the key to escape this matrix
before it's too late?
>> Sacred psychoactive plants
can serve humanity at this
time, as they always have,
to see beyond the program
of the matrix of the physical
world and remember that we are
actually divine cosmic beings
and that there is nothing
beyond that that can control
us, that we are actually all
the one creator.
They have always been here
provided by our dear planet
Gaia to help us awaken.
>> These sacred plant medicines
and psychedelic renaissance are
pointing to the need for
us to open our hearts.
And opening and
healing our hearts
is going to help illuminate
our mental health problems.
>> I believe William Blake said,
if the doors of perception were
open, we would see things
as they really are--
infinite.
So my hope is that the
psychedelic experience
helps us to see the oneness, how
our actions can affect others.
Anything that can
help lift the veils so
that we can see more clearly--
I think the planet really
needs that right now.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> Up next, join us on
an auditory exploration,
incredible healing synergy
between psychedelics
and frequency.
[PSYCHEDELIC MUSIC]